**ACCOUNT-1: Our Courtyard**

*"Tata! Chinta pichalus yekkada? ( Grandpa! Where are the tamarind seeds? )"* was the most expected question and my grandpa’s expected answer would be, *"Check the storeroom."* Mukund anna was always given the job of separating the seeds from the tamarind, and while this process takes about 15 minutes, Satya akka and Nandini meticulously draw the Pachisi board on the freshly cleaned red oxide floor. I would run around the backyard to get some weird distinct shape stones for my pawns, and Chintu (my sister) would steal my grandma’s buttons for her pawns.

Teams gear up to face the *"battle of the day,"* while Amma and Pedamma (Aunt) take a break from their morning papad laying duty to serve us the energy drink - FILTER COFFEE. And the Battle begins with bets and rules and secret plans and so on…

Our grandparent’s house was filled with kids during summer vacation. Our courtyard was bustling with activities, and it was the center stage for drama. It hosted a sequence of our morning rituals with a little tweak here and there. ( We might decide to play outdoors or Pedamma wants to get the storeroom cleaned and so the courtyard becomes a temporary storeroom).

We occupied the corner facing the kitchen as it was easy to sneak in for some snacks and water in between the game. While at the opposite end, close to my grandparent’s bedroom was an age-old black and white TV glued to which were Tata and Patti (Grandpa and Grandma) debating intensely on how Gopi cheated on Shakti and why is she not rebelling (Characters of a Tamil TV serial, “Metti Oli”). Amma and Pedamma would be with neighbors on the road facing the end sharing tips on how to grow brinjal using greywater or how thick should the mehndi paste be. At the rear end would be the storeroom which was sleeping most of the time until someone opens the door and switches on the light to look for salt or rice.
#dice
The routine settles, and we begin the game, and the stakes are high. Whoever loses the game sponsors our candy treat for the day. With the sound of dice, the team that begins the game would pray for a six while the others prayed the opposite. Satya akka, partner, and in most cases, my savior was a pro in double numbers rolls. *"It’s the way you hold the dice and leave them with the flow to roll effortlessly on the ground,"* she would always tell me, and the floor would take care of the rest. Our square dices were completely different from the long rectangular ones, and the way you hold them dictates the number you want.

Fast-forwarding a few minutes into the game, I scream Akka *"Vetti vetti , oru angi pota vetti… Mukund anna pawn ange irrikudu!"* (Akka kill kill, if you put a five it's a kill… Mukund anna’s pawn is right there!). There was tension in the air, and we needed that five. The sound of dice breaks the pin-drop silence, and it's a *"FIVE!"* and the pawn is lost.

The memories in the courtyard are immeasurable. We had times when your parents joined the game and took over. At times it would turn into a day-long tournament where we take turns to finish the game. The bets from simple candy treats would turn into full-fledged lunch treat where the winning team decides the menu. One best memory was semiya payasam by Nandini’s aunt ( who lost the bet that game!) for the next day dessert which had Kova and fresh cream in it. From someone like me who is not a sweet fan, it was the best payasam I ever had!

**ACCOUNT-2: Around the board**
#dice
*"Mukund anna malli cheat chestadu akka! (Mukund anna is going to cheat for sure!) We have to keep an eye on the dice. He is going to roll the dice near that even corner and it will just stand halfway. While we debate whether it's two or three Balaji anna will swap the pawn. Nenu aa corner lo kuchonestha dice ki addanga. (Akka! I'll sit at the corner so that I can block the dice and make sure it won't get stuck.) You make sure Balaji anna doesn't go near that pawn. The next we can kill it with a four, and I’m sure when it rolls the dice, it will be a FOUR!”*

Our courtyard flooring had a small bump on one corner, and if he had to confuse or cheat our opponents, that’s where we would roll the dice. While a 10-minute long argument would go on figuring out what the number would be, the pawns would be flipped by the cheating team member. And the agreement turns into a fight at the end of which either team would forget what numbers they wanted in the beginning and with mutual consent start fresh. The first ground rule for the new game would be to avoid that corner and we never followed it. The circle of events starts, and we end up abandoning the game blaming each other for cheating and tiring the others. At times the fights are carried on to the next day when a mediator (generally Pedamma) would settle mid-ground by shooing us to the other side of the courtyard.

Sillarahalli (My grandparent’s village) had myths and legends swirled around it like other villages of its kind. Sometimes exhausted with bets on candy treats, we would eventually talk about the old beliefs. While we roll the dice, most of the time Nandini starts telling us about all these stories, and before we realize it, everyone would be so absorbed in the story that we forget to make the move. She once told us that our grama devatha (Village protecting deity) forbids people from entering the village after sunset and it is considered a bad omen to cross the village boundary against her will. One of them had ignored the villagers’ warning and tried a night journey and their car tire got punctured and they had prayed the next day at the temple to never break the law. I had laughed at it thinking it was the silliest belief but Satya akka told us that until a few years back there was no tar road and the route where the puncture incident took place heads to Chennai and was very unsafe. Robbery incidents have been reported and despite repeated warnings from the local cops, people traveled at night. This incident was just a way to caution the travelers to avoid the night journey. When you try to connect god, creates fear and people tend to follow it.

Daayam was not just about playing the game and winning the bet. Sitting on either side of the board, we learned through each other’s experiences. Why do we have such customs? How do we have our fears associated with our deeds? And simple ones like how to divert our opponent with some creative techniques.

**ACCOUNT-3: Pachisi Board**

*"Chintu, did you save those yellow buttons Pedamma gave us yesterday? You better keep it in Amma’s bag before Vijay or Badri anna asks for it."* It was pre-Pachisi preparation to make sure everyone has their

 pawns for the next day’s game. Nandini and Satya akka would be assigned the task of getting the best chalk sticks- unused and most importantly unbroken.

Making sure that the courtyard is all dry and ready to be conquered was Amma’s task which she was least interested in and yet had to do it. Intense discussions would be interpreted by Pedamma’s yummy coffee smell or Tata-Patti’s serial discussion. While these conversations would happen in the kitchen, the Pachisi on the red oxide floor would take shape in white scaled to make sure all the pawns fit in the boxes assigned for them. Sometimes, the cross would be depicted in different colors to indicate the respective houses.

I would sit beside Satya akka while she would she tries to make the pachisi look alive and tell her my ideas on tactics and defense which would be stormed off as soon as we started. Our seating was definitely dictated by the way we rolled the dice. Despite trying to sit equidistant from each other, certain spots would have an add-on advantage. Leaning towards the wall meant less space to roll the dice, while the opposite side has comparatively more space. Sitting towards the kitchen door meant cramped space while on the other end was a decent seat. Since we had a dedicated space and a safe corner to play the game, adjustments would be taken for the team advantage and we would come up with ways to make space for dice to roll (like sitting a little inclined to create a small triangular area for the dice or maybe sitting a little off centered to avoid cramping).

Pachisi was an arena of opportunities to show talent, expertise, and the best of all have immense fun, and take complete advantage of losing the team’s *"bet task."* Nandini and Bhushan had to take us to our neighbor’s coconut grove unseen and had to make sure that we would get the coconut water from the freshly cut tender coconuts kept safe at the storehouse. It was scary not to get caught but it was the ultimate fun to move around like shadows in the broad daylight amidst the lush green fields leading to the grooves.

Pachisi board was my Tamil class. Playing with my cousins and neighbors is how I learned the language. You had to know the keywords or else one wrong move and the team takes a heavy blow. Onnu (one) Errangi (two fives), Vetti (killing the opposite team’s pawn), were the first words I learned. From a simple game, it transcends into a learning experience and every time we play a game there is a life lesson we all would carry with us at the end.

**ACCOUNT-4: Patti’s precious dice**
#dice
*"Cosily tucked within white cotton cloth is a pair of long slender dice, carefully guarded by Patti (grandma) all the time- Her precious!"* The story behind her intense protection is still a mystery. Various conspiracy theories revolved around it. Maybe it was Tata’s anniversary gift to Patti? She must have got it from her mother? There were even crazy ones like it was a pair of gold dice with red stones and she lost them while playing with her friends and hence she doesn't want to give them to anyone! Patti conveniently ignored the questions pretending to be busy with her word puzzle.

One thing was for sure- Patti was a pro at dayam. Her entry was a game-changer and with her precious dice she would turn the tables around.

We always craved for those forbidden dice in the soft white cloth. Amma and pedamma would warn us not to enter that bed corner and yet we would formulate creative plans to get her dice for a game. The easiest way to please her under normal circumstances would be to get her morning coffee and biscuits before she would ask for them. During the dayam days, she was extra careful, and tricking her was a herculean task. And our superhero for this task was Mukund anna, Patti’s challa kutti ( grandma’s favorite one). When he manages to get the dice from patti, the war would be next level. These dice have a history of double number roles at the right moments that would decide the fate of our game!

With players ready, bets decided and the teams formed- It was time to roll patti’s precious on the red oxide floor to start the game. Nandini shouts to her teammate Balaji anna, *"Oru aaru"* (One six), and the dice roll *"SIX"!* It was our first game and everyone just stared at the marvel before them. *"They seem to know what number is needed. Semma intelligent dayam (Very intelligent dice)."* He was true indeed! The dice seemed to be reading our minds and when you want that number, it rolls the same one most of the time.

Situations like these drew our neighbors’ attention who would sit at the corners and try to put in their expertise on how to play better. There would hint us into moving the one at the left corner then the right front. I even remember instanced, where tired of yelling at us for moving the wrong pawn, they would push us away and start playing themselves. And suddenly our courtyard would have a new wave of excitement and crowd cheering and it would feel like standing at the center of a cricket pitch and trying to score a six.

There were many interesting speculations, different versions of why these dice dictated the way we played the game, and deep down it was influencing our game theory and how to plan the next move. How some strategies would be better if you don't listen to the expert advice and go with the flow. The game becomes interesting when we anticipated our opponent's move and tried a counterattack to safeguard our pawns. We tend to create a connection with the things we use the most and change the gameplay into a mode most enjoyable and intense, something our traditional board games are known for.