Taxonomies

Foucault explains, in the preface to The Order of Things, how the Chinese Encyclopedia offers a non-normative configuration or division of animals into seemingly curious categories of fabulous, frenzied, innumerable, tame, etc. This form of classification challenges biological taxonomization of living bodies, through an imagination of order that extends beyond limitations of scientific thought. There is a certain impossibility to this order, in its subversive ‘randomness’ when compared to familiar structured forms of classification that have become inherent to (thought and) order.

As we engage increasingly with the role that the process of taxonomization can play within deconstructing and subverting hegemonic social and scientific discourses, we also begin to understand the non-procedures and non-actions that constitute this very process of classification, and what they offer to methods of making, recognizing, and appreciating narratives and meaning. An examination of the material, visual, physical, and tactile, through and within varied processes of taxonomization allow for the identification of narratives, sub-narratives, elements, associations, networks, histories, and futures located within them.

In his book – The Art of Play – Board and Card Games of India, Andrew Topsfield offers a large archive of traditional board games of India. His work grants perspective to games such as Pachisi, Gyan-chaupar, Shatranj, etc., providing the necessary historical references. It renders a functional relationship between the cultural (religious/mythological) significance of these games, and their rules, materialities, and players. However, it lacks the affective, cognitive, and emotive responses that emerge within the games’ histories.

Topsfield’s presentation of the game boards also invites scrutiny in its tendency to interpret the games within sensibilities that reflect different cultural values. He relies on technicality within making and playing practices, where his work forms a base layer of information that provides beneficial insight into the games’ contexts. The non-procedures and non-actions that constitute the process of taxonomical classification then inhabit a layer of order (or disorder) atop these functional details. This layer of dis/order, seemingly absent from the scope of his work, works with the games through categories based on materialities, values, virtues, biases, hierarchies, mobilities, forms, bodies, and elements. Substantiating this missing layer to completely understand gameboards is an exercise in worlding - the criss-crossing of the material with the affective, the cognitive with the body and the emotive with the formal. Once that layer - which the project calls under-histories - is available to read, it pushes the design sensibilities for new interventions, thereby calling forth a new community of indie-futurists to respond to this under-histories. 

Working with game boards as sites of production, taxonomies perform as tools to examine visual material, specific elements within them, their making and meaning histories, associations and conversations with one another, and emerging stories, questions, assumptions, etc. that are produced within the site of the board. The produced narratives form meta-sites to locate under-histories and non-dominant narratives. Taxonomization, thus, proves an interesting exercise to unite detailed examination of the game boards and categorizational endeavors to present in affective ways – the functional, material, cultural, and social.
